Greetings, brothers and sisters!
Our next music-video presentation
is about to begin.
As you watch it,
please reflect on how our faithfulness now
will lead to even greater joy in the future.
If you have a mobile phone
or other electronic device,
please adjust it to a setting
that will not disturb others.
And now enjoy the presentation!
Welcome to this session
of our “Always Rejoice”! Convention,
which corresponds
to the Sunday morning session
on your printed program.
The theme is taken
from Psalm 37:4, which tells us:
“Find exquisite delight in Jehovah,
and he will grant you
the desires of your heart.”
We invite you to stand
as we sing together song number 22,
“The Kingdom Is in Place—Let It Come!”
After the song, you may pause the program
for your local opening prayer.
Again, that’s song number 22.
You may be seated.
Is it possible to rejoice
even when dealing with severe trials?
The Bible assures us that it is!
This morning’s seven-part symposium
will explain how Jehovah helps us to do so.
Each speaker
will introduce the one to follow.
To begin, let’s give our attention
to Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
as he presents the first talk, entitled
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Tribulation.”
Did you notice that in each of the titles
of our symposium talks,
it uses the word “despite”?
The English word “despite” can mean
without being blocked or thwarted.
So our ability to rejoice
will not be blocked or thwarted.
We can actually rejoice despite trials.
Well, initially,
that sounds contradictory, doesn’t it?
I usually associate with rejoicing
the receiving of gifts, not trials.
And yet, that is the very point.
We can rejoice
despite trials because of gifts
that Jehovah provides for us.
And we’re going to review
three of those in our symposium:
our relationship with Jehovah,
our precious brotherhood,
and the glorious hope we have for the future.
Please turn with me to Romans chapter 5,
verses 3-5,
and see if you can identify
when this first gift
is introduced in the verses
—a relationship with Jehovah.
Romans 5:3-5 says: “Not only that,
“but let us rejoice while in tribulations,
“since we know
that tribulation produces endurance;
endurance, in turn, an approved condition.”
Well, “an approved condition” with whom?
It’s with Jehovah.
It says: “The approved condition,
in turn, hope,
and the hope
does not lead to disappointment.”
And why not?
Because of this relationship with Jehovah.
It says: “Because the love of God
“has been poured out into our hearts
through the holy spirit,
which was given to us.”
Yes, when we endure trials,
we can sense Jehovah’s approval,
and that helps us
to rejoice despite the hardship.
Now find Romans 8:38, 39.
As you know, Paul experienced
one trial after the other,
and yet he was convinced that no trial
could distance him from Jehovah
(could separate him from God’s love),
an abiding relationship.
Romans 8:38, 39 says: “For I am convinced
“that neither death nor life
nor angels nor governments
“nor things now here nor things to come
“nor powers nor height nor depth
“[and then he says] nor any other creation
“will be able to separate us from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Our relationship with God
can help us in times of trial.
But how about the second gift from Jehovah?
First Peter 5:9
—1 Peter 5:9—
Satan tries to capitalize on our trials,
but notice the admonition here in verse 9.
It says: “But take your stand
against him, firm in the faith.”
And what will help?
It says: “Knowing that the same
kind of sufferings [so trials]
“are being experienced
by the entire association
of your brothers in the world.”
Well, we have felt that trust,
the support from our brotherhood,
particularly in these last six months or so.
We’ve sensed it so clearly.
Romans 12:12 is our third gift from Jehovah
—a provision to help us to endure trials.
Romans 12:12 and it says it
so very crystal clear.
It says: “Rejoice in the hope.”
And then it adds: “Endure under tribulation.
Persevere in prayer.”
So our relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
and our hope can help us
deal with these circumstances,
and it might vary
depending on circumstance.
Just as an example,
a brother in prison might have
no access at all to the brotherhood.
So, what sustains him?
Well, in that case, it would be
his relationship with Jehovah.
You may be remembering Brother Harold King
on JW Broadcasting®.
For four and a half years,
he was in solitary confinement
in a Chinese prison.
But was he really all alone?
The authorities thought so,
but he had the best cell mate
anyone would ever want.
He said in his video interview:
“I had a lovely relationship with Jehovah.
“I loved him very dearly.
He was real.
He wasn’t fictitious.”
Yes, Brother King was able
to rejoice under that trial
because he had developed
that real relationship with his God.
Another example:
A depressed brother or a sister
may be struggling to maintain
his relationship with God.
Well, there’s another gift
from Jehovah that can come into play.
He may be supported by one
or more of the brotherhood.
It’s like a person
who’s fighting to breathe properly.
He’s still alive,
but he’s struggling to hold on.
But then in comes
the support of a medical team,
and he begins functioning normally again
and breathing properly.
Our brotherhood can come
to our aid and support
when we’re suffering depression
or some other serious trial.
Well, how can our hope
help us to rejoice despite the trial?
Another example:
Some of us have Christian parents
who are now old and incapacitated
in some way, and that’s a trial for us.
It might be like a loved one
having a bad accident,
and now he’s laid up in a hospital bed.
He can’t take care of himself.
But then the doctor comes in and says,
“He’s going to have a full recovery.”
Well, that gives us hope.
It’s similar with our elderly parents
because of our sure hope for the future.
It’s like Jehovah saying,
‘They’re going to have a full recovery
from the ravages of old age.’
Yes, hope helps us to rejoice.
Whatever our situation or trial, we can
be sure that one or more of these provisions
will help us
suffer through the hardship with joy.
I invite you to find now Romans chapter 8,
Romans chapter 8, and we’re going
to look at verses 35 and 37.
In this symposium,
we’re going to be considering
each of the seven trials
mentioned in verse 35.
Please identify them with me.
Romans 8:35 says:
“Who will separate us
from the love of the Christ?
“Will [1] tribulation or [2] distress
“or [3] persecution
or [4] hunger or [5] nakedness
or [6] danger or [7] sword?”
Those are the seven,
but now look at verse 37.
It says: “On the contrary,
in all these things [all seven of them]
we are coming off completely victorious
through the one who loved us.”
Well, each symposium talk
will include a video
of a brother or sister
who experienced a trial, a severe one.
And we will identify which of these gifts
helped them to rejoice
despite the tribulation.
Let’s consider that first one
that Paul addressed;
it’s called “tribulation.”
Tribulation refers to suffering
caused by some trying situation,
possibly a debilitating illness.
Turn with me
to 2 Corinthians chapter 12,
2 Corinthians chapter 12, and we’re going
to look at verses 7 and 8.
This tribulation was vexing to Paul,
so much so that he
called it a thorn in his flesh.
Second Corinthians 12:7, 8 says:
“To keep me from becoming overly exalted,
“I was given a thorn in the flesh,
“an angel of Satan, to keep slapping me,
“so that I might not be overly exalted.
“Three times I begged the Lord about this,
that it would depart from me.”
“A thorn in the flesh”
—so this obviously was a physical malady,
and he said it kept “slapping [him],”
so it was continuing on.
It wasn’t just like the common cold or flu,
and we’re better in a week or so.
This was continual.
It was a chronic trial for him to deal with,
and based on the Scriptures,
it’s thought that it may have been
a serious degeneration of his eyesight.
Well, that would have been
very disconcerting to Paul.
In fact, he prayed three times
that it would be gone.
‘Take it away from me.’
And remember, they did not have
eyeglasses with corrective lenses back then
—no eye surgery was available.
So this was a chronic tribulation.
And think about this:
By means of holy spirit,
Paul had on a number of occasions
cured people of their sickness.
So he could have easily wondered:
‘Where is this gift of the holy spirit
when I need it?
I need a cure.’
Well, what helped Paul to rejoice
despite his tribulation?
It was his close,
abiding relationship with Jehovah.
If you still have 2 Corinthians
chapter 12 there,
let’s read together verse 9.
And this is where Jehovah tells Paul,
‘You will have no miraculous cure.’
Verse 9: “But he said to me:
“‘My undeserved kindness
is sufficient for you,
for my power is being made perfect
in weakness.’”
Jehovah says, ‘No cure,
but I’m going to give you the power
to continue on despite the tribulation.’
Well, notice the relationship
that Paul evidently has with Jehovah
in the last part of that verse.
He says: “Most gladly, then,
I will boast about my weaknesses,
in order that the power of the Christ
may remain over me like a tent.”
He rejoiced in the strength from Jehovah.
Look at verse 10;
he said: “So I take pleasure
“[and we can substitute
with the word “rejoice.” I rejoice]
“in weaknesses,
in insults, in times of need,
“in persecutions
and difficulties, for Christ.
For when I am weak,
then I am powerful.”
Well, we want you to watch a video,
and this is an example of tribulation.
What helped this brother and his wife
to rejoice under tribulation
in the form of a serious illness?
For  the last 45 years,
I’ve been in the pioneer work,
traveling work,
and in Bethel here
for a number of years.
My health was very good
—never had any problems at all.
One day, I had a headache.
It was severe.
I really couldn’t see clearly—anything.
We went to the Bethel doctor,
and he referred us to a specialist,
and the specialist
gave us the diagnosis
of a very aggressive brain tumor
called glioblastoma.
He had surgery the next Thursday.
Then, after surgery, he had radiation
and chemotherapy at the same time.
A year later, he had to have another surgery.
And right now he is on his fourth type
of chemotherapy treatment.
From the very first time that he got sick,
the hardest thing
was to see my husband
become increasingly dependent
upon me and upon other people.
I didn’t want this
to define who we are.
The brothers played a pivotal role
and tried to help us.
One brother found out
that I had to go in for surgery.
He gave me a scripture,
and we prayed together.
I’ll always remember that.
It was a beautiful example.
I also get a lot
of encouragement from Sara,
who gets us prepared for meetings.
When we go out in service,
I’ve gotten the opportunity
to go and help people
—just talk to them
and encourage them.
In my Bethel assignment
in the Service Department,
I have a brother or two
who will come over and review a case
that we’re considering,
and I get a lot of joy in that way.
I’m very thankful that I
can still do a little something
to help.
For me,
because he’s been humble
through this whole thing, it’s been easier.
My hope is strong, and I’m going to keep
right on going this way
and serve Jehovah
right on into the new world
or whatever comes.
Obviously, Scott and Sara Shoffner
had a good relationship with Jehovah,
and Sara supported Scott wonderfully.
But did you notice
the additional gift from Jehovah?
Scott said that the brotherhood
played a pivotal role in helping them.
He remembered
a specific scripture and a prayer
that was shared before his surgery,
and young brothers came in and helped him
with his assignment afterward.
In his own words,
he said that that brought him “a lot of joy”
—joy despite tribulation.
So how about you?
Which of the provisions
from Jehovah is buoying you up
as you deal
with your particular trial or tribulation?
your relationship with Jehovah?
Is it the brotherhood, your hope,
or maybe some other gift from God?
If you’re stressed, under tribulation,
remember this: It’s as if Jehovah
is watching the monitor,
and he sees us in pain of heart.
But he reassures us and says: ‘Be calm.
You’re going to be OK.’
So no matter the pain,
no matter the tribulation,
may we remember
those words at Romans
chapter 8, verses 37 and 39:
“In all these things we
are coming off completely victorious
through the one who loved us.”
And in verse 39, it’s saying that nothing,
nothing, no tribulation
“will be able to separate us
from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
Rejoice despite tribulation.
And now it’s my pleasure to introduce
Brother Samuel Herd,
a member of the Governing Body,
for the talk on the symposium
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Distress.”
Have you ever been distressed?
Well, if you haven’t, you’re not human,
because all humans
suffer from some form of distress
in the short period of life
that we have this side of the new world.
But what is distress?
Some say it’s extreme anxiety.
Others say it’s sorrow.
Then there are a few who label it as pain.
Well, what is it that causes the distress?
Well, a number of things.
Here’s one that somewhat heads the list:
death of a spouse.
Second behind that
is injury or some type of illness.
Then there’s the loss of a job.
“How am I going to care
for my family, my wife, and my children?”
And then here’s a very important one:
not being able to share
in the Kingdom preaching work to the full.
So these are reasons
why we are distressed.
Now, of course,
these are not the only reasons.
There are many others.
But how would you fare?
How would you feel
if you were undergoing
some type of distress?
Well, could you be sad?
Is that how you’re going to feel?
Are you depressed?
Some say: “Well, yes.
That’s what hits me.”
Others say: “Well, low in spirits
—I just, I don’t know;
“I’m just down and out.
My get-up-and-go got up and left.”
Others say, “Well, I just feel
like going off and hiding and crying.”
Well, that pretty well sums it up.
But is it possible
to rejoice when distressed?
Well, we know it is
because we have examples in the Bible.
The Bible is filled with examples.
We’re just going to isolate one or two.
Paul was one who
rejoiced behind being distressed.
He was able to rejoice
despite the feelings that he had.
Now, if you have your Bible handy,
open it, please, to 2 Corinthians,
and read along with me
2 Corinthians 7:5.
You’ll notice that it says:
“In fact, when we arrived in Macedonia,
our bodies got no relief,
“but we continued
to be afflicted in every way
“—[now, note the following]
there were fights
on the outside, fears within”
—“fights on the outside, fears within.”
Yes, Paul was up against it,
and he knew it;
but yet he was able to rejoice.
But what was he up against?
Well, earlier, Paul had hoped
to meet up with Titus in Troas.
But he hadn’t heard from Titus,
and he didn’t get a message from him.
He wondered about him.
He wondered how he was feeling.
Was something hard-hitting
against him at this time
in that Corinthian congregation?
So Paul wanted to know.
So he worried about his friend,
and we would too
if we were waiting to hear from a friend
and we hadn’t received an answer.
He likely worried so much
that it caused him to feel
somewhat depressed.
He thought,
‘Well, how long will I have to wait
on my friend Titus?’
Well, he didn’t have to wait too long.
Titus finally joined him in Macedonia.
And what happened?
Well, Paul was comforted,
and upon hearing Titus’ favorable report
about the brothers and sisters in Corinth,
Paul “rejoiced even more,”
says 2 Corinthians chapter 7,
if you’ll just glance down
at verses 6 and 7.
So he was helped by his brother.
It’s the brotherhood that we
have to reach out to too.
And it will help us
—this beautiful brotherhood
that Jehovah has brought us into.
And we’ll find
that our brothers are there for us
regardless of what we
may be fighting against.
So we can rejoice.
We may experience distress
in the form of discouragement.
And usually all of us have had that
come into our life from time to time.
There are so many things that can
bring about discouragement.
Here’s something else:
anguish over a lost loved one
—maybe a marriage mate has died.
You’ve been together for many years,
and like Jehovah said in the garden of Eden:
“The two shall become one.”
And, you know, that’s really what happened
to you and your wife,
who you lost,
or your husband, who you lost.
So you are somewhat low in spirits.
You are blue.
You’re a little downhearted, gloomy,
heavyhearted and, yes, sad.
But, now, let’s recall
that we have three provisions
that can strengthen our ability to rejoice
despite the trials that we’re undergoing.
What are they?
Well, here’s the first one:
It’s our relationship with Jehovah.
David had a fine relationship with Jehovah.
And if you’ll turn to 1 Samuel chapter 30,
and just follow along
as you hear me say a few things
behind these two, three, or four verses.
We’re going to start with verse 1.
That’s 1 Samuel chapter 30.
When his own men wanted
to kill David because the Amalekites
burned the city down and had taken
their wives
and children captive
—even took two of David’s wives—
David was very distressed,
as you’ll see in that account.
But, now, notice near the end of it,
there in verse 6:
“But David strengthened himself
by Jehovah his God.”
Here’s where our strength comes from too.
It’s from turning to Jehovah our God,
and he’s there for us,
and he’s going to comfort us.
He is the God of comfort,
as was acknowledged
in his written Word, the Bible.
So that’s the first:
our relationship with Jehovah.
Now, here comes the second:
It’s our brotherhood.
My, how we are strengthened
by our brothers!
Remember the 133rd Psalm,
where it says
at the very beginning: “Look!
“How good and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
Now, we all know
that that is a true statement,
but we also know something else:
It’s a major scheme
of Satan the Devil
to isolate us from our brothers
if  he can put us in jail.
But if that happens and we are jailed,
we can still associate.
Now, how can we do that if we’re jailed
and they’re way off somewhere
and we’re behind bars?
Here it is: by memories.
For instance, get out your scrapbook
and photo album
that are locked in your brain
(not the literal
but that are locked in your brain)
and feed on the “spiritual scraps.”
What are they?
The memories.
Memories are foods
that strengthen and cause rejoicing.
Now, if any of you out there
are as old as I am,
then you know that old folks
do this all the time.
We’re just too tired to do anything else,
so we just live on memories.
And it brings joy to our heart.
Now, that’s the second thing:
our brotherhood.
Now, the third is our hope.
Our hope is to serve Jehovah
under righteous conditions
throughout eternity.
Eternity is forever.
It never ends.
It goes on and on and on.
For instance, look at the sky above;
you cannot see
a beginning or an ending.
That’s eternity: always there.
You’re going to be able to rejoice
for an eternity living forever.
Now, as you watch the following video,
take note of which provisions
helped our brother and sister to rejoice
—and that, despite distress.
We knew when we first got married
that we would enjoy having a family.
So when we first found out
that we were pregnant,
we were overjoyed.
When Becky first told me she was pregnant,
it’s like a light switch
went off in my heart.
Immediately, I felt like a dad.
Instantly, you begin to make plans.
It was like all this love
just flooded in.
One day, Becky was feeling a little off,
and a friend encouraged us,
“Just go see the doctor.”
So we did.
And while we were there,
they did an ultrasound.
The doctor came back
and they said
there wasn’t a heartbeat anymore.
That was a very difficult moment
—something I can never forget.
Because all of a sudden, all of those hopes,
those dreams,
those preparations you are making
—they’re gone.
This place in your heart
that opened up to make room for this child
is now this huge, gaping, open hole
and there’s nothing to fill it.
It just is incredible emptiness.
We didn’t know what to do.
But it was a meeting night,
so we wanted to go to the meeting.
It felt like the place
where Jehovah’s holy spirit is,
and we wanted to be there
because we knew
we were not going to be able
to survive this on our own strength.
We needed Jehovah.
After people learned
that we had lost
the baby, so many people
shared a little bit
of their experiences with me,
which made us feel not alone,
for sure.
But Jehovah has also given us
some incredible friends
—friends who have stuck closer to us
than a brother,
friends who always seem to know
when we’re having a hard day,
who have prayed with us,
who have taken walks with us, listened.
And I know those are expressions
Jehovah has given us.
Regaining joy
is a work in progress.
There was a particular scripture
in my personal study
that I found very helpful,
Psalm 139, where it talks
about how there’s nowhere
that Jehovah can’t find us.
There’s no darkness
that is too dark for Jehovah.
And it felt
like such a dark place.
Dwelling on that scripture
was something that helped me a lot.
And gradually, bit by bit,
I felt like Jehovah did help me
to see beautiful things again.
When we experience distress,
Jehovah helps us.
We’re not left in despair.
For instance, here
in 2 Corinthians chapter 4, it tells us,
if we also include the footnote—
Now, that’s the 8th verse
of 2 Corinthians chapter 4.
Now, this is how it reads:
“We are hard-pressed in every way,
but not cramped beyond movement;
we are perplexed,
but not absolutely with no way out.”
Now, the footnote says,
“not left in despair.”
Jehovah is not going
to leave us in despair.
Now, which provisions
from Jehovah are helping you to rejoice
despite any mental or emotional distress
that you may be experiencing even now?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
our hope, or is it something else?
In addition to the provisions from Jehovah,
consider these practical suggestions:
Maintain a healthy diet.
Coupled with that, get sufficient rest,
and get a measure of exercise.
Now, you can make two lists.
One, of the problems that you can solve,
and the other, of problems
you cannot solve at present.
Act on the first list,
and leave the rest in Jehovah’s hands.
Talk things out with an elder
or perhaps a mature friend,
someone you’re close to,
or a parent.
They are there to help us,
and they’re ready and willing
to share the knowledge
and the understanding that they have.
And they’ll do it generously with you.
Realize that some forms of mental distress
may require professional assistance.
This is what Jesus said at Luke 5:31:
“Those who are healthy
do not need a physician,
but those who are ill do.”
Now, of course, that decision is up to you,
but it’s there in the scripture.
It may be that you need
the help of a physician,
someone who is qualified
to look into certain matters.
Please rejoice in knowing
that you have Jehovah’s approval.
Don’t doubt it, not even for a moment.
Now, granted, it’s not easy
to deal with mental or emotional distress.
But keep in mind
that Jehovah understands,
and he will help you
to keep on enduring.
And your loyal endurance
brings Jehovah’s approval,
which is one of the greatest reasons
that we have for rejoicing.
Know that God has not left you.
You have his approval,
like a large shield surrounding you,
and his blessing.
So rejoice in that knowledge,
and keep on rejoicing
despite distress.
Brother Gerrit Lösch,
a member of the Governing Body,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice
Despite . . . Persecution.”
Since the beginning of Christianity,
Christians have been persecuted.
Please locate with me
2 Corinthians chapter 11.
Paul experienced persecution
and referred to it at 2 Corinthians
chapter 11, verses 23-25,
and it says: “Are they ministers of Christ?
“I reply like a madman,
I am more outstandingly one:
“I have done more work,
been imprisoned more often,
“suffered countless beatings,
“and experienced many near-deaths.
“Five times I received
40 strokes less one from the Jews,
“three times I was beaten with rods,
once I was stoned,
“three times I experienced shipwreck,
a night and a day
I have spent in the open sea.”
Shortly after recounting
his many difficulties,
in chapter 12, verse 10,
Paul wrote:
“So I take pleasure in weaknesses,
“in insults, in times of need,
“in persecutions and difficulties,
for Christ.
For when I am weak, then I am powerful.”
Of course, Paul took no pleasure
in persecution itself,
but he rejoiced
because of what can result from it,
contributing to Jehovah’s vindication.
Find Philippians 1:14
and then verse 18.
Persecution gives us also an opportunity
to see Jehovah act in behalf of his people
and magnify his name.
It can lead to a fine witness.
At Philippians 1:14, 18,
Paul wrote:
“Now most of the brothers in the Lord
“have gained confidence
because of my prison bonds,
“and they are showing all the more courage
to speak the word of God fearlessly.”
And verse 18: “With what result?
“Only that in every way,
whether in pretense or in truth,
“Christ is being proclaimed,
and I rejoice over this.
In fact, I will also keep on rejoicing.”
Instead of weakening our relationship
with Jehovah and our hope,
persecution can strengthen it.
In the discussion recorded at Romans 5:3, 4,
Paul explains:
“Let us [exult] while in tribulations . . . ;
“endurance, [leads to],
an approved condition;
“the approved condition, in turn, [to] hope,
and the hope
does not lead to disappointment.”
There is no doubt that hope helps us mightily
to endure persecution.
The Bible uses the word “hope”
in different contexts.
It speaks of the “hope of salvation,”
which can refer to spiritual salvation.
There is hope of surviving Armageddon.
There’s hope of everlasting life
on the Paradise earth.
There’s hope of immortality in heaven.
What hope was he talking
about at Romans 5:3, 4?
About the heavenly hope.
Look at the context;
Romans 5:2
and the second part of the verse says:
“Let us rejoice,
based on hope of the glory of God.”
All Christians in the first century
had the heavenly hope.
Their hope was not just that problems
or world conditions would be resolved
or that they would get healed
from some sickness.
Their hope was the heavenly hope.
Colossians 1:3 says:
“We always thank God . . .
when we pray for you . . .
“because of the hope that is being reserved
for you in the heavens.”
Now please turn to Romans
chapter 8, verses 20 and 21.
The “great crowd” of Jehovah’s Witnesses
today hope that Jehovah
will reward them in an earthly paradise.
Paul pointed to that hope when he wrote
at Romans 8:20, 21:
“For the creation was subjected to futility,
“not by its own will,
but through the one who subjected it,
“on the basis of hope
“that the creation itself
will also be set free
“from enslavement to corruption
and have the glorious freedom
of the children of God.”
However, when Paul said
at Romans 12:12
to “rejoice in the hope” ahead,
he meant the heavenly hope.
But the “other sheep”
can also rejoice in the hope
that’s ahead of them.
So, then, we can all rejoice triumphantly.
The world’s hope is dark;
your hope is bright.
The world’s hope is collapsing;
your hope nears fulfillment.
The world’s hope is based on credulity;
your hope is based on faith.
The world’s hope leads to disappointment;
your hope leads to success.
For with the new world so very near,
our fondest hopes,
whether heavenly or earthly,
will soon be realized
to our eternal satisfaction.
Let’s read together Titus 2:13:
“While we wait for the happy hope
“and glorious manifestation of the great God
and of our Savior, Jesus Christ.”
Furthermore, according to Romans 8:24, 25,
hope will help us to endure.
“Hope that is seen is not hope, . . .
“but if we hope for what we do not see,
we keep [on] waiting for it with endurance,”
the scripture says.
There are degrees of hope.
How can we strengthen or deepen our hope?
As to the term “hope”:
“In the Bible,
the basic sense of the Greek term el·pisʹ,
“used here, [means] ‘expectation of good.’
“In this context,
Paul mentions hope last in a series
“—after tribulation, endurance,
“an approved condition.
“So he is obviously
not referring to the initial hope
“gained by accepting the good news from God.
“Rather, he is referring to a reinforced hope
“that a Christian can gain after enduring.
“When a Christian faithfully endures trials,
“he realizes that he has God’s approval.
This realization
strengthens his initial hope.”
Like Paul,
we can rejoice despite persecution.
We may encounter
hateful words and actions at school,
at work, in our family,
or as a result of governmental restrictions.
At Matthew 5:11, 12,
in the Sermon on the Mount,
Jesus said the following:
“Happy are you when people reproach you
“and persecute you
and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing
“against you for my sake.
“Rejoice and be overjoyed,
“since your reward is great in the heavens,
for in that way
they persecuted the prophets prior to you.”
As you watch the following video,
note which provisions
helped our brother and sister to rejoice
despite persecution.
Early one morning,
armed Russian special forces
broke into my home.
They handcuffed me
and searched my place.
They took me
to the FSB office for interrogation.
Two days later, the court sentenced
me to pretrial detention.
I was scared because I didn’t know
how I would be treated in prison.
Threatening that things would
get worse for me, the officer demanded
that I incriminate myself, admit guilt,
and give the names of my fellow believers.
I also really missed my dear wife.
It was so hard without her.
For two months, I didn’t have
any spiritual food or a Bible,
so I decided to make one.
My wife sent me a notebook,
and every day I wrote down verses
that I was able to remember.
After I had written about 500 verses,
I was given a Bible.
Because I was
so spiritually hungry,
I read it through in four months.
During this time,
I wrote letters
to my wife and friends
and shared interesting things
that I learned from my reading.
But the letters I received
from my friends and my dear wife
gave me the feeling
that the brothers and sisters
were so close to me,
as if they were in the cells next to me.
I wasn’t lonely.
I felt as if my friends
were right there with me.
Pretrial detention
isolates a person from society.
But it’s impossible to isolate
someone from Jehovah.
Throughout the day,
I prayed to Jehovah many times,
but I especially waited for bedtime.
When everyone was in bed
and only the night-light was on,
I could talk to Jehovah as much as I wanted.
There were times when I was all alone
in the cell and, of course,
I took advantage of the situation.
I would get down on my knees
and would literally cry
as I prayed to Jehovah.
I decided to write my requests to God
on a sheet of paper and then mark off
the ones that he answered.
I was convinced that Jehovah
was very close to me.
I also quietly sang our songs
throughout the day.
But when I was all alone,
I sang at the top of my voice.
I also tried to give
a witness whenever possible.
We discussed a variety of topics
—everything from tattoos
to “the king of the north.”
All my fears
and anxieties were for nothing.
I was in detention 343 days,
and “not even a hair” fell from my head.
This was the most interesting
year of my life
—an excellent school to help
refine my spiritual qualities.
I have never felt so close to Jehovah.
What a great honor
to uphold God’s sovereignty in this way!
What is helping you today to rejoice
despite any opposition
you may be experiencing now?
It is your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
and your heavenly or earthly hope
—all these things.
May we rejoice
in the love of Jehovah and our brothers.
If you are enduring persecution,
be assured that your brothers
—not only your friends,
not only brothers in your congregation,
but all around the earth
—are praying in your behalf.
Angels observe you
and feel proud if you stay faithful.
You can greatly contribute
to the encouragement of the faithful angels.
Like Jehovah, Jesus, and the angels,
your brothers can “take pride in you”
and rejoice
“because of your endurance and faith”
despite persecution.
Brother William Turner,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Hunger.”
How do you feel when you miss a meal
or haven’t eaten for some time?
You know, for many it affects their mood,
their ability to concentrate,
sometimes their ability
to even think straight.
But what if that hunger
was beyond our control
or prolonged to the point where we
had no other choice but to be hungry.
Well, that was the situation
that the apostle Paul found himself in
as he engaged in his ministry.
For example,
at 2 Corinthians 11:27, Paul said
that he was “in hunger and thirst,
[and] frequently without food.”
This likely occurred while Paul was traveling
through desolate regions or hot desert areas.
At times, he may have been hungry and thirsty
because of being dependent on strangers
or on whatever provisions
he could obtain through his own labors
in unfamiliar surroundings.
Paul also lived
during the time of a great famine
—a famine which lasted
more than three years
and caused oppressive poverty
in Judea and Jerusalem.
But despite facing
all these times without food,
it’s interesting to note
the attitude of the apostle Paul.
At 2 Corinthians 6:10,
he describes himself
and his fellow Christians
“as sorrowing
but ever rejoicing.”
So Paul acknowledged that difficult times
could bring a measure of sorrow and distress.
But how was he able to rejoice
—to have this inner joy—
despite his hunger?
Well, notice his answer.
Turn with me in your Bibles,
please, to the book of Philippians.
And we’re going to read
Philippians chapter 4,
verses 11-13.
Paul says: “Not that I am saying this
because I am in need,
“for I have learned to be self-sufficient
regardless of my circumstances.
“I know how to be low on provisions
and how to have an abundance.
“In everything and in all circumstances
“I have learned the secret
of both how to be full and how to hunger,
“both how to have an abundance
and how to do without.
“For all things I have the strength
through the one who gives me power.”
Did you note that in verse 12,
Paul speaks of learning “the secret
of both how to be full and how to hunger”?
This secret involves relying on Jehovah
for life’s necessities and being satisfied
with whatever he provides.
And Paul certainly did that.
He learned a trade to support himself
so as not to be a burden to others.
He was fully occupied with his ministry,
so he had few material possessions.
But he was grateful for the brotherhood.
He was appreciative of what those brothers
were able to provide—what he needed.
Paul learned
through each of these experiences.
And as he saw Jehovah’s hand in his life,
it became apparent to him
that no matter what the circumstances were,
he had to look to Jehovah
to satisfy his needs.
Did you notice verse 13?
Jehovah sustained Paul.
He gave him power.
So when Paul did face
those adverse circumstances,
he was still able to be content,
maintain inner joy,
and carry out his ministry.
Well, what can you and I
learn from Paul’s example?
It may be that we too might face
hunger for a variety of reasons.
For example, food shortages
—this could result from civil unrest
or an economic crisis.
World events today
have caused many to lose their jobs
around the world,
including our brothers.
So a personal economic setback
may force us to live on less.
Hunger can also result from persecution.
When many of our brothers
were put in Nazi concentration camps,
depriving them of adequate food
was one of the diabolical methods used
in an effort to break their integrity.
And even when it comes
to theocratic pursuits,
some who move to serve where the need
is greater are forced to make adjustments
and must learn to be content with less.
So, really, in any number of situations,
you and I could experience a lack of food
or even hunger,
and that could make us
feel anxious and distressed.
But the antidote is trust
and reliance on Jehovah.
You know, when we do that,
it helps us to remain calm
and to take things one day at a time.
When inflation hit in his country,
one father said,
“My daily prayer was simply
that God would ‘give us today
“our bread for this day’
in order for us to survive.”
We must also be grateful
for whatever Jehovah provides.
When that same father went to the food line
to purchase items,
he said that one time
the only thing they had left
was something he didn’t like.
Well, what did he do?
He said: “I didn’t like it,
“but it was food.
So that’s what we ate that night.”
And he was grateful
to Jehovah for providing it.
You know, perhaps right now,
we may be in a position
where we only eat what we like.
But if circumstances change,
could we adjust and still be grateful?
Isn’t it reassuring that we
are cared for by a God
who gives us what we need?
And, of course, it is important that we
utilize the resources Jehovah provides.
We’d like you to watch the following video.
As you do, note which provisions
helped our sister to rejoice
despite experiencing hunger.
Well, here in Venezuela,
long before the crisis,
there weren’t so many financial problems
like we have today.
We could go to the stores, we could buy
the amount of food we wanted,
and life was peaceful.
For us,
the situation started to get really bad
five years ago.
It was hard to get any food at all,
even basic items.
When it came time to buy something,
well, it was all gone.
There were two elders that,
I can say,
were checking on me almost daily
—always asking
how much food I needed.
When I prepared it and served it,
my main concern
was that my children would get enough.
I always gave them more food.
Even though
my youngest boy would ask,
“Mommy, is that
what you’re going to eat?”
I would tell him,
“Yes, dear, I’m fine with this.”
Then he would say,
“I don’t think so.”
I would think, ‘I can handle this,’
but the amount that I was eating
just wasn’t enough for my body.
One Sunday morning, during the meeting,
I wasn’t feeling very well but,
thanks to Jehovah,
my daughter was nearby.
When I came to, she said,
“Mom, you fainted three times!”
I said, “That can’t be!”
So the brothers
immediately took me to the doctor.
I was diagnosed
as having severe malnutrition.
The brothers began a plan of action:
They brought food
that was already prepared
and, in fact, they would sit
by me until I finished my food.
I have not yet
fully recovered my body weight,
because I was a little heavier.
But healthwise,
I have felt very well.
The elders were always looking after me,
and that boosted my energy.
And definitely,
I never lost my joy.
And it’s all thanks to Jehovah!
Thanks to him because he
is the One who sustains me.
He clothes me, he feeds me,
and he gives me great friends.
That is what Jehovah gives me.
Did you notice the provisions
that helped our sister?
First, her relationship with Jehovah
—she saw the importance
of staying close to him
and regularly attending her meetings
—and then, of course, the brotherhood.
Wasn’t it comforting to see
how attentive the elders were,
making daily checks on her,
providing food for her and her family,
and even making sure
she ate enough as well?
Well, it’s these same provisions
—maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from the brotherhood,
as well as holding fast to our hope
—that can help us to rejoice
despite any periods of hunger.
We agree.
We are fully convinced
of what Paul said at Philippians 4:12.
Jehovah can and does
provide life’s necessities
in all circumstances.
When facing hunger,
it is natural to be concerned
for our own welfare
and that of our loved ones.
And yet, as we’ve seen,
it is possible to rejoice
despite any hunger we may experience.
But the key?
Learn the secret.
Everyone likes to be in on a secret,
and Jehovah is more than happy
to reveal this one to us,
but we must rely on him
and see how he acts in our behalf.
How pleased Jehovah must be
when his servants remain
loyal and joyful, trusting
that he will never abandon them!
Brother Robert Luccioni,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of the symposium,
“We Can Rejoice
Despite . . . Nakedness.”
Is it possible to rejoice
despite experiencing difficult trials?
Thus far, we’ve seen how the apostle Paul
maintained his joy despite tribulation,
distress, persecution, or even hunger.
And no doubt this has been
an encouragement to you because many of you
have or are
going through those very things.
But what about situations
where we lose everything
because of disasters or civil unrest?
Can Paul’s experience help us in that?
Our theme scripture at Romans 8:35
quotes Paul,
stating that not even “nakedness”
can “separate us
from the love of the Christ.”
And Paul had firsthand experience
with that as well.
Turn, please, to 2 Corinthians 11:27.
And notice how he describes his trials
at 2 Corinthians 11:27
as being “in labor and toil,
in sleepless nights often,
“in hunger and thirst,
frequently without food,
in cold and lacking clothing,”
or “nakedness,” as the footnote says.
Now, Paul’s lack of clothing
was not due to laziness on his part.
We know from the Scriptures that Paul
worked hard to care for his needs.
But, rather, being cold and lacking clothing
was due to things
he experienced in his ministry.
For example, remember the occasion
when Paul was on board the ship
that was driven and shipwrecked
by that most violent wind
on the Mediterranean.
As the ship broke to pieces,
Paul and the others
hung on to pieces of wood
and the pieces of the ship,
and they may have reached land
with little or no clothing on.
In fact, remember the people of Malta
had to build a fire
to warm the cold survivors.
On other occasions, Paul escaped for his life
with just the clothes on his back.
At other times, he was beaten or stoned,
which surely ripped his clothes to shreds.
And at Acts 16:22,
we read of the account
where “the civil magistrates,”
it says, “after tearing
the garments off [of Paul],
gave the command to beat [him] with rods,”
and then “threw [him] into prison.”
Well, these accounts help us
to better understand Paul’s words
at 1 Corinthians 4:11
—1 Corinthians 4:11.
He says: “Down to this very hour
“we continue to hunger and thirst
and to be poorly clothed
and to be beaten
and to be homeless.”
But despite these circumstances,
what did Paul encourage
his fellow Christians to do?
Look at verse 16.
He says: “I urge you, therefore,
become imitators of me.”
See, he encouraged them to imitate
his example—rejoice despite trials.
At Romans 12:12,
we read where he tells us to:
“Rejoice in the hope. . . .
Share with the holy ones
according to their needs.”
See, Paul was able to rejoice and help others
even when experiencing great loss himself.
Now, many of our dear brothers and sisters
have been affected by terrible disasters.
Just consider a few over the past year:
earthquakes in Albania,
the Philippines,
Puerto Rico, and elsewhere;
severe flooding in Congo,
Spain, the United States;
hurricanes and typhoons
in the Bahamas and the Philippines;
terrible fires in Australia
and the United States.
And the list goes on and on.
And, see, the result of these
and many other disasters
is that our brothers and sisters,
some of you,
have had to flee their homes
in the middle of the night
with just the clothes on their backs.
Or in other situations, the disaster
destroyed all of their belongings.
It pains us when we hear those reports.
And you dear brothers and sisters
who are going through these things,
please know that we
keep you in our prayers.
But even in those circumstances,
our brothers continue to rejoice.
How is that possible?
Well, as you watch the following video,
note which provisions
helped our brother and sister
to rejoice despite a period
of inadequate clothing.
Well, one thing you have to understand
about living in New York City
is that it’s a very fast-paced life.
So you’ve got to keep up with that lifestyle.
We were doing pretty fine,
and we were
happy pioneering, working
—just trying to survive in New York.
One of the things that you
usually have to worry about
is your safety
—being careful of your surroundings.
But hurricanes are just something
we never considered;
it’s something we
never had to worry about.
The day when we first heard the warning,
it was raining outside and kind of windy.
We saw the water coming into the parking lot
where our apartment was,
and that’s when I realized
something was about to happen.
We got out with the clothes on our back.
It was just total devastation.
You lose everything
—one single night.
I never had any thought that water
would come into our place and destroy
everything from our material possessions
to our clothes.
And I truly felt
what it was like to be destitute.
It just broke my heart.
And all I could do
was wonder, ‘Where do my wife
and I go from here?’
Our assembly was scheduled for that weekend.
I didn’t even have
a suit jacket or a tie.
I think I probably took for granted
something as simple as clothing.
I always had it.
But the brothers and sisters stepped in
to assist in so many different ways.
I heard a knock on the door that Friday
—three suits
and shoes!
They purchased clothing for us.
It was a most unbelievable experience.
These friends gave us big hugs
and gave us envelopes.
We are fully convinced
we were clothed by Jehovah’s love.
We were able to go to our assembly
and enjoy taking in spiritual food,
even though we were in that situation.
Even though we lost everything physically,
we were still able to keep on pioneering,
which we have been doing up to this day.
Jehovah made a promise.
If we keep seeking
first his Kingdom,
everything else he will take care of.
And that’s where my joy comes from.
No matter what type of tribulation
you go through in your life,
and even if it’s to the point of nakedness,
it will never ever be able to stop
or cut off the relationship
that we have with our God, Jehovah.
Did you notice what helped this couple?
They lost everything in one night.
They were unsure what they would do,
how they would go on.
But did you notice their resolve?
Remember, Brian said, ‘No matter
what tribulation we experience,
‘even to the point of nakedness,
it will never cut us off
from our relationship with Jehovah.’
They were touched by how
their brothers stepped in to help them.
They kept their hope in Jehovah
and the future alive.
Well, what do we learn from this?
We learn that when we
are going through trials,
even those trials that cause us
to lose our possessions
or be inadequately clothed,
we can maintain our joy
because of the three things
we’ve been discussing:
maintaining our relationship with Jehovah,
receiving relief from our brotherhood,
and holding fast to our hope.
Now, many of you immediately respond
to help your brothers and sisters
when you see a need,
and we appreciate that so much.
Disasters are on the increase,
both in frequency and intensity,
and thus the need to provide relief
for our brothers continues to increase.
And we commend you
and thank you for what you do.
Why, some of you volunteer
to go into areas to help.
For example, after Hurricane Dorian
in the Bahamas,
Witness pilots transported
more than 700 volunteer workers
into those affected areas.
Others of you assist your brothers
and sisters right in your own area.
For example,
in Congo, many of our brothers
had to flee their homes and villages
with just the clothes on their backs
because of civil unrest.
With all their possessions
and livelihood gone,
what would they do?
Well, their brothers and sisters
in neighboring congregations,
even though they had limited means,
provided money,
food, clothing, and even housing
for their displaced brothers.
In Bolivia and Venezuela,
congregations shared meals
or did a local distribution of food.
And look at how
our brotherhood has stepped in
during this COVID-19 pandemic,
providing food supplies,
relief supplies, emotional support,
spiritual support—congregations
and families helping one another out.
And, see,
because of your self-sacrificing spirit
and your generous donations,
you are a blessing
to your brothers and sisters
all around the world.
And what a slap
in the face this is to Satan!
Why do we say that?
Well, you’ll remember that at Job 1:11,
Satan insulted Jehovah
—and all of us who love Jehovah—
by insinuating that we would turn our back
on Jehovah when going through trials.
Let’s look at that at Job 1:11.
He says: “But, for a change,
stretch out your hand
“and strike everything he has,
and he will surely curse
you to your very face.”
See, Satan was convinced that when it
came to losing our possessions
or staying loyal to Jehovah,
we would choose our possessions.
Satan was convinced that when it
came to helping ourselves
or helping somebody else,
we would choose ourselves.
How wrong he was!
How angry he must be
when he sees what is happening
in Jehovah’s organization today!
So, what do we need to do?
Keep making him angry.
Continue to help your brothers
and sisters in need.
And when we do, not only do we gain happiness
but we help our brothers to rejoice as well.
So, dear friends,
may all of us be determined
to keep our joy alive
by doing those three things:
maintaining our relationship
with Jehovah,
recognizing the love
and support of our brotherhood,
and meditating
on our precious hope.
And never forget,
when we continue to loyally serve
Jehovah despite nakedness
—despite losing all of our possessions—
we make Jehovah’s heart glad.
And that is one
of our greatest reasons for rejoicing.
Now Brother Ralph Walls,
a helper to the Personnel Committee,
will present the next talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Danger.”
Our theme does not end
in the form of a question.
Rather, it is a statement of fact.
We can rejoice despite danger.
Please follow along as we look
to the example that the apostle Paul set.
He was able to rejoice despite danger,
and he faced many dangers in his ministry.
In one verse,
he mentions eight different types
of dangers he faced,
including “dangers from robbers.”
While in Ephesus,
Paul may even have been exposed
to wild beasts in an arena.
Please turn with me
to 2 Corinthians chapter 1,
and we’ll read verses 8-11.
And notice what it says:
“For we do not want you to be unaware,
“brothers, of the tribulation we experienced
in the province of Asia.”
Now, he wrote this
while he was in Europe—Macedonia.
He continues:
“We were under extreme pressure
“beyond our own strength,
“so that we were very uncertain
even of our lives.
“In fact, we felt that we had received
the sentence of death.
“This was so that we would trust,
“not in ourselves, but in the God
who raises up the dead.
“From such a great risk of death
“he did rescue us and will rescue us,
“and our hope is in him that he
will also continue to rescue us.
“You also can help us
by your supplication for us,
“in order that many
may give thanks in our behalf
for the favor we receive
in answer to the prayers of many.”
Less than a year earlier,
he had written his first letter
to the Corinthians.
This time, he was in Asia,
the city of Ephesus.
In the 15th chapter of that letter,
verse 32 says:
“If like other men,
I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus,
of what good is it to me?”
His comments would fit an experience
with literal wild beasts in the arena.
But Paul’s hope
in the resurrection strengthened him,
as he said: “This was so that we would trust,
not in ourselves,
but in the God who raises up the dead.”
He was also encouraged
and strengthened by fellow Christians.
He said: “You also can help us
“by your supplication for us,
“in order that many
may give thanks in our behalf
for the favor we receive
in answer to the prayers of many.”
In the congregation,
we also enjoy a warm brotherhood,
which provides assistance
and support in numerous ways.
At one point in his ministry,
Paul and his traveling companions
felt “extreme pressure”
and were “uncertain even of [their] lives.”
Where did Paul find support and relief?
He was encouraged and consoled
by fellow Christians who came to his aid.
When natural disasters
or other calamities strike,
time and again our Christian brothers
are the first on the scene
to render needed assistance
materially and spiritually
to fellow Christians
as well as to others in need.
Today, Christians are not exposed
to wild beasts in arenas.
However, like Paul,
we can rejoice
despite danger that we may face.
Any of us can face “dangers from robbers,”
or the threat of physical assault,
especially in times of civil unrest.
The Bible foretold that in these “last days,”
people would be “fierce,
without love of goodness.”
As you watch the following video,
note which provisions helped one family
to rejoice despite such dangers.
I was born in Caracas and live
in an area of the city called Petare.
In Petare, I have to live
with violence and delinquency.
A few years ago,
we lost a pioneer sister who,
sadly, was hit by a bullet.
Well, something like that
also happened to my son.
There was a confrontation
in the neighborhood,
and a stray bullet hit my son
and killed him instantly.
That left such a void.
It hurt me to go into his room
and see his empty bed.
And then to see his things:
his shoes, his favorite clothes.
To see them in the wardrobe—
Crying was inevitable.
These situations were very difficult
to deal with at the time.
But as soon as the congregation
found out about the situation,
right away they gave me support.
They were there to help care
for all the things you need to do
when you lose a loved one.
After going through all that,
I was very afraid
to continue
going out in field service.
I feared for my life
and for the life of my family.
I prayed to Jehovah,
and Jehovah gave me
practical wisdom to continue.
Sometimes when I’m alone meditating
and thinking about my son,
those memories return and,
of course, I have a setback,
so to speak,
and I begin to cry again.
But keeping clearly in mind
the promise of the resurrection
is what motivates
me to keep going.
An account that I really like
and that I always keep in mind
is the account about Lazarus.
There, Martha uses an expression.
She says, ‘I know
he’ll rise on the last day.’
And that is the same confidence
that I have in Jehovah.
I know that my son will rise.
Jehovah will give him to me.
At the time
that this terrible thing happened,
it’s true that I lost my joy for a time.
But later after the mourning passes,
the resurrection hope gives us joy.
It’s as if
Jehovah speaks to me,
saying, ‘Keep calm.’
It’s as if he gives me a gentle pat,
telling me to ‘keep going
and that’s what will happen to you.
Keep faithful, and continue loyal,
and I will give him back to you.’
Did you notice what helped this family
to rejoice despite danger?
Prayer, their hope in the resurrection,
the supportive brotherhood
and, of course, Jehovah’s spirit.
Which provisions from Jehovah
are helping you to rejoice
despite the dangers you may have to face?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
our hope, or something else?
In these last days,
with “critical times hard to deal with,”
we are being admonished
to rejoice in the hope
of deliverance from danger.
We long for the end of this wicked system,
just as Habakkuk longed for relief
from wickedness in his day.
Let’s look at Habakkuk chapter 1.
Feel the stress that he felt
as a result of the violence, quarreling,
and oppression that surrounded him.
He asks: “How long, O Jehovah . . . ?
“How long must I ask
for help from violence . . . ?
“Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
“And why do you tolerate oppression?
“Why are destruction and violence before me?
And why do quarreling and conflict abound?”
Why? Why?
How long?
But note what he recorded
in chapter 2, verse 3:
“For the vision is yet
for its appointed time,
“and it is rushing toward its end,
and it will not lie.
“Even if it should delay,
“keep in expectation of it!
“For it will without fail come true.
It will not be late!”
Like Habakkuk, we trust in Jehovah
and have the assurance
that He will soon end violence.
Habakkuk took the initiative
to draw close to Jehovah,
his trusted Friend and Father.
He did not just fret over his situation,
relying on his own understanding.
Instead, he prayed
about his feelings and worries.
That’s a good example for us.
Notice his resolve in chapter 3 and verse 18.
There he says:
“As for me, I will exult in Jehovah;
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.”
Today, Jehovah, the “Hearer of prayer,”
invites us to show our trust
by prayerfully sharing our concerns with him.
Jehovah didn’t reprove Habakkuk
for expressing his anxieties.
He had them recorded,
likely to show that it’s only natural
for us to have such feelings at times.
But Jehovah wants us to call out to him.
Doing so will help us
to experience Jehovah’s response
—his warm embrace
by means of his kind guidance.
He will help us
to know his thoughts
no matter what afflicts us.
Our heartfelt prayers
are one of the deepest expressions
of our trust in God.
We rejoice in knowing that Jehovah
is eager to deliver us
from all forms of danger!
Brother David Schafer,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Sword.”
During his first imprisonment in Rome
from about 59 to 61 C.E.,
the apostle Paul was permitted
to stay in his own hired house,
though he was constantly
guarded by a soldier.
During those two years,
he preached to everyone who came to him
and he wrote inspired letters
to the Ephesians,
Philippians, Colossians, Philemon,
and evidently Hebrews too.
And then Paul was apparently released.
Now he could renew his missionary activity.
He could write to Timothy,
who was serving in Ephesus,
and to Titus, who was serving on Crete.
Soon, though, Roman Emperor Nero
reportedly blamed Christians
for the fire that destroyed much of Rome,
and once again Paul found himself in chains.
After decades of faithful Christian service
(the year was 65 C.E.),
how did Paul feel?
We get our answer by reading
from his second letter to Timothy,
which he wrote from prison.
Turn, please, to 2 Timothy chapter 4.
Did the men
who apprehended Paul carry swords?
No doubt.
Did seeing those swords remind Paul
how King Herod Agrippa I had executed James,
the brother of John, by sword?
We can only imagine.
But from this excerpt from 2 Timothy,
we see that Paul sensed
that his own execution was imminent.
And we also see something else.
Here we see the three things
that strengthened Paul
as he faced execution.
Please read with me 2 Timothy 4:6-8:
“For I am already being
poured out like a drink offering,
and the time for my releasing is imminent,”
that is to say, his death,
which would allow
for his eventual resurrection
to Christ’s heavenly Kingdom.
And verse 7 continues:
“I have fought the fine fight,
I have run the race to the finish.”
“The finish”—yes, Paul sensed
that he was approaching
a triumphant end to his personal race.
He continues:
“I have observed the faith.
“From this time on, there is reserved for me
the crown of righteousness.”
And here we see Paul’s strong hope.
And he continues:
“Which the Lord, the righteous judge,
will give me as a reward in that day.”
Can you see Paul’s strong relationship
with Jehovah in this expression?
his unflagging confidence that God’s Son
would bestow the promised reward?
And then he says:
“Yet not to me only,
but also to all those
who have loved his manifestation.”
Paul loved his Christian brothers,
and he didn’t forget them.
That’s how Paul was able to rejoice
despite the threat of death
—his brothers, his relationship
with Jehovah, and his hope.
It’s not that Paul wanted to die.
Of course he would have preferred
to live on and keep serving Jehovah
together with his
Christian brothers and sisters.
Yet, he faced death with courage,
and he rejoiced in the reward
that he knew was reserved for him.
Well, like Paul, we too
can rejoice despite the threat of death.
How so?
Let’s go back
to our theme text at Romans 8:35.
What is the answer
to the two questions Paul poses here,
namely: “Who will separate us
from the love of the Christ?
“Will tribulation or distress or persecution
or hunger or nakedness or danger or sword?”
The answer is found in verses 38 and 39:
“For I am convinced that neither death
“nor life nor angels nor governments
“nor things now here nor things to come
nor powers nor height nor depth
“nor any other creation will be able
“[yes, death is not able] to separate us
from God’s love
that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
A temporary pause in the grave
cannot extinguish Jehovah’s love
for his servants.
Does Jehovah still love
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
How about Sarah, Rebekah,
Job, Moses, Daniel?
What about all those
who have died in prisons,
in concentration camps
on account of their strong faith?
Does Jehovah still love them?
Of course he does.
And he still loves the hundreds
of brothers and sisters
who have died in recent months
as a result of COVID-19.
He still loves your grandma,
your dad, your sister.
He keeps them in his memory.
He’ll call them back to life.
And this fact helps us,
dear friends, when we face
the threat of death by sword as Paul did.
Now, as you watch the following video,
note which specific provisions
from Jehovah helped
our Brother Baite Michael Dugbe
to rejoice despite
facing the threat of death.
When everything falls apart
and when everything
around you is chaotic,
the one thing you have
is your relationship with Jehovah.
My name is Baite Michael Dugbe.
I was born in Monrovia, Liberia in 1980.
Growing up in Monrovia
before the war was an amazing time.
I had wonderful parents.
We grew up in a nice house,
and we went to a great school.
When I was nine years old,
everything changed overnight.
There were reports of rebels
trying to take over the government.
Those reports alone
made people panic.
Businesses started to close down.
Services were shut down
—the lights, the power, the water—
everything stopped.
The next few years were really unstable.
In 1996, things again fell apart completely.
It was all-out war.
This time, the rebels were in the city.
There was a lot of looting going on.
There was a lot of shooting.
The rebels—they were known for torture
if people would not agree to fight with them.
In a situation like that,
there’s a lot of fear;
there’s a lot of panic.
And when your fear level rises,
the best way to deal with it is prayer
—prayer to Jehovah,
asking him specifically for direction
on what to do next.
As the fighting escalated
and it got closer to where we lived,
it was no longer safe.
We had to flee,
and we ended up at the branch office.
The brothers were very loving;
they took really good care of us.
Our spiritual activities
—they made sure we kept up with that.
Looking back,
I’m very grateful to have survived.
Two things helped us get through.
Number one:
our relationship with Jehovah.
That’s the only thing that keeps you stable.
But then, also, we were able to survive
because of the help
from the brothers and sisters.
Those moments of trial
—that’s when you really realize
how much you need the brotherhood.
I have a lot of joy
in my assignment at Bethel
in Audio/Video Services.
I love the brothers and sisters
that I work with.
It’s all thanks to Jehovah
that I am alive and that I get
to serve him every day.
This video reminds us that life
in this system of things is fragile.
But did you notice what helped Brother Dugbe
to rejoice despite the threat of death?
It was his relationship with Jehovah.
And it was his Christian brothers
who helped him to keep his hope alive
through regular study,
meetings, and preaching.
Is it possible that some of us
will have to die for our faith
as many early Christians did
and as some
modern-day Witnesses have done?
Yes.
We’re not guaranteed
a trouble-free existence
in this system of things.
And there’s the very real possibility
that we may die by illness,
accident, or the other ravages
of these last days.
We might die before the new world comes,
as many of our dear friends already have.
Or we may be spared alive
through the great tribulation.
Either way, we need to be determined
to remain faithful to Jehovah
right down to the end.
“The one who has endured
to the end will be saved.”
If we assume that the new world
will arrive before we die,
we may be unprepared
to remain loyal to the death if necessary.
Similarly, if we assume
that the great tribulation will not come
in our lifetime,
we will be unprepared for its hardships.
The only way to be prepared
for either eventuality
is to stay spiritually strong and alert.
“Keep on the watch, therefore,” Jesus said,
“because you do not know
on what day your Lord is coming.”
It’s been good
for us to consider more closely
the apostle Paul’s strong conviction
as expressed at Romans 8:35.
What have we learned from this symposium?
We’ve seen how Romans 8:35-39
assure us that no trial of any sort
will cause Jehovah to stop loving us.
Knowing that we have Jehovah’s approval
and love even while under trial
is a key to rejoicing despite tribulation,
distress, persecution, hunger,
nakedness, danger, sword, or anything else.
Therefore, continue to draw closer
to the One who loves you so very much.
Strengthen your trust in Jehovah
through personal study and prayer.
Keep assuring your heart of his love.
Treasure our precious brotherhood,
and draw closer to one another.
Cherish your God-given hope,
and meditate on “the real life” yet ahead.
And finally, remember the inspired prayer
found at Colossians 1:11.
If we continue doing these things,
dear friends, then, like Paul,
we will be able to rejoice
despite trials of any sort.
Notice these encouraging words
found at Colossians 1:11:
“And may you be strengthened
“with all power
according to his glorious might.”
Now, just how much power is there
“according to [God’s] glorious might”?
We don’t have to imagine
because his Word reveals what Jehovah
has accomplished and will yet accomplish
by means of his holy spirit
—the most powerful force there is.
And for what purpose will he grant you this?
Not simply so that you may endure,
not merely so that you may endure fully,
not only so that you may
endure fully with patience,
but as it says:
“So that you may endure fully
with patience and joy.”
And with that assurance,
we can endure despite any trial
no matter how difficult it is,
no matter how long it lasts
because our Father’s unfailing love
will enable us to rejoice
both for all eternity and always.
Thank you, brothers,
for those strengthening talks.
And we thank Jehovah
that he provides what we need
to safeguard our joy.
Let us now stand
and sing together song number 9,
“Jehovah Is Our King!”
Again, that is song number 9.